From Hanselman it's dot com.
It's Hansel minutes or weekly
discussion with web developer and
technologists. Scott Hanselman hosted by
Carl Franklin. This is Lawrence Ryan here
to announce show number 44.
Recorded Wednesday, November 29th, 2006. Support for
Hanselman. This is provided by
COVID Smith tool makers of
COVID Smith, an extensible template
based code generator for.net Hanselman.
His listeners get $100 off
coach Smith professional with coupon
code H M 100. online@covidsmithtools.com.
Support is also provided by.net
developers journal the world's leading.net
developer magazine online at www
dot  dot com. In
this episode, Scott and Carl
discuss pro audio basics. Hi,
this is Carl Franklin. You're listening
to Hansel minutes. I'm here
with Scott Hanselman again. Hi
Scott. How are you, sir?
And you're in Africa right
now, Tanzania. You're not really,
we're recording this at a
time, but by the time
the listeners listening, you'll be
in Africa. I will. So
for all intents and purposes,
future Scott is in Tanzania.
All right. Well, this is
an interesting show that you
propose to me that we
do one on audio basics.
Yeah, I mean, I know
the basics of audio, so
maybe this would be audio
intermediate because when we first
started talking about doing the
show, you had made a
couple suggestions about me getting
certain bits of equipment. And
I was like, Oh, well,
Hey, I've got this, this
$20 USB microphone from logic
tech. I'll just use that.
Right. And then you said,
Oh, Scott, you patted me
on my head condescendingly. There's
so little that you know
about sound. And I said,
well, shoot, we've done 43
44 shows now. And I
still don't quite understand how
you do it. So let's
talk about audio. Well, first
of all, let me just
say that audio is like
a movie, you know, and
it's like video it's everywhere
and it sounds good. And
therefore people think easy. I
thought, I mean, I thought
so when you go to,
when you just listen to
the radio, it all sounds
good. Every little thing they
do sounds good. And so,
you know, you, you kind
of, since it's so pervasive,
you kind of get the
misleading feeling that, that it's
easy to do. And it's
a natural thing for people
just write off, Oh, well
you get a microphone. Oh,
you get some stuff, you
put it together. It's easy.
And you know, I think
you were one of the
first critics of the quality
of podcasts out there. Yeah.
Initially I heard a lot
of podcasts and it sounded
like someone when somebody was
sitting in the front seat
of their car at a
movie theater with a Sony
portable microphone recording on a
micro tape or micro cassette,
I just sounded like someone
was phoning it in. And
literally some of the are
phoned In, right. I think
that the dotnet rocks were,
you know, really sounded great.
I think more and more
people are learning how to
make stuff sound better. And
I think it's starting to
show, but yeah, it's difficult
to do a podcast out
of your garage. It absolutely
is. So, you know, what
I'm going to hopefully do
here is just a, you
know, dispel a few myths
and, you know, tell you
a few things that you
need to know. And we're
going to start Scott with
line level versus Mike level
signals. There are two actually
voltages that, that are used
when you're plugging in something
to a computer or to
a mixer or to any
kind of audio device. And
you really need to know
the difference between two, have
you ever had this happen?
You plug something into your
computer and record on it
and your recording sounds completely
hosing distortion. Yeah. Way, way,
way louder than it is
supposed to Way louder than
it's supposed to. And that's
because what you've done is
you've taken a line level
output, which is hot, hot,
hot, hot, and you've plugged
it into a mic input,
which is low, low, low,
low, low, and expecting very
low signal. Does it have
anything to do with when
I plug my iPod into,
into my, into my tape
deck adapter, I have to
adjust the volume on my
iPod, Right? Because your tape
deck adapter expects a microphone,
which is putting out very
low signal. And so the
hack is you have figured
out is to turn the
record volume way down. But
when you do that, you're
not utilizing the amplifier, the
recording amplifier to its full
potential. Ah, so, and that
brings me to another thing,
which is the difference between
an amplifier and a resistor.
Whenever you had any kind
of fader, you know, like
a fader, a button, a
dial and knob, a turn
up a turn down. It
can either be a resistor,
which means that at full
volume, there's, it's the completely
normal, natural, full signal, sweet
and light and crude and
all that. No problem. When
you pull it down, it's
actually resisting. It's actually reducing
the input. Whereas an amplifier,
you start in the middle
somewhere and you pull it,
pull it up to amplify
the signal. So those are
two different things that you
can think of as ways
to control audio. Okay. There's
a really good explanation of
line level versus Mike level
at shrinks.com/katie. I, and there's
a layman's explanation. You know
what plugs go where, and
then there's also a more
detailed explanation for geeks like
us. Hmm, cool. Basically microphones
that are dynamic microphones. Well,
all microphones that are good
are low impedance. There might
level impedance impedance, as it
sounds is a resistance it's
impedance of the signal. And
so it's kind of backwards.
Low impedance is a lower
signal and high impedance is
a hotter signal. Okay. So
I want it, you said
I want a low impedance
Mark. Well, yeah. Microphones that
you plug in with XLR
connectors are low impedance. They're
balanced audio, and there's a
really discussion, a really good
discussion of balanced versus unbalanced
audio@shrinks.com. K D H a
N. So let me ask
you this. If I take
a regular microphone, like back
in the day, we used
to do radio. When we
all did radio shows as
a kid, right? You take
a tape player, you will
get a written, you'll get
this classic little black plastic
radio shack microphone. When I
plugged that one eighth inch
plug into the little tape
deck, what kind of microphone
is that? And what kind
of signal is happening over
that? That's a high impedance.
Yeah. I'd say high end
Putin's microphone is that high
impedance because it's an inexpensive
Balanced basically. And unbalanced, unbalanced
connectors are used primarily for
instruments and for short cables.
And because the wires are
typically not well, they, they
are shielded, you know, like
shielded cable, but they, since
they're, they're just two wires,
there's a positive and a
negative, right. A balanced line
has a positive, a negative
and another wire. And basically
it does a differential between
the, it sends the signal
down on two wires plus
the ground and does a
differential between them. So it
balances it out. It's like
a nice, complete circuit. And
if you're going to have
a long cable and long
instrument, cable, long quarter inch
cable, whatever it is, especially
at line level signals, you
need to have a balanced,
a balanced systems. And not
only does it mean and
balance cables, you can think
of as stereo cables, like
a stereo quarter inch has
the two bands around it
and an XLR cables, also
three prongs and it's balanced.
So, okay. Well that I'm
talking on has, has two,
two wires inside, but it's
not recording me in stereo
it's tip ring, that's it?
Yeah. Okay. Yeah. Mano and
also unbalanced. So a lot
of armchair audio enthusiasts who
like to do use mixers
and stuff are probably using
unbalanced connections for everything, just
because you have short cables,
there doesn't seem to be
a problem, but one of
the manifestations of unbalanced systems
is hum. So if you
have a lot of, you
know, patch, cables and connections
going to a lot of
different places and you have
a lot of electrical system,
you know, a lot of
electrical devices that are all
plugging into the same circuits,
you can have ground loops
and you can have hum
that goes through those connectors.
So I found when I
was hooking up my home
stereo, a and this may
seem obvious to you and
our listeners, but it was
not obvious to me immediately
that when I ran my
very speaker wire over the
power adapter, the power brick,
it sounded really bad. Yeah,
exactly. Cycle hum. Okay. Yep.
So they have hum eliminators,
but it's best to just
use BA to use balanced
cables and balanced inputs. And
it typically means if you
have a balanced input or
output on a mixer or
something like that, you're going
to be sending data at
a hotter level plus four,
it's called. Okay. So if
I know if I talk
to me about equipment, I
mean, when I go to
the audio store, I assume
I would go to the,
the music store to buy
this stuff. Well, actually, So
you'd go online there, you
can go to a music
store, but typically they stock
things that are more for
musicians, that kind of stuff.
And if not, a lot
of music stores have studio
gear, of course, you know,
the big ones like Sam
Ash and Sweetwater sound and
even Crusoe music here in
new London does a lot
of mail order. But, but
there are good places online.
And I'm going to bring
you to some of those
links where you can see
some of this stuff. Okay,
fantastic. Also, I really want
to mention one of my
mentors in life, Ethan Weiner,
who not only started Crescent
software back before visual basic
and in a.net way before.net.
And, but he also is
a serious, serious audio file.
He built studio, he built
studios and synthesizers in the
seventies, mixing desks and things
like that for fun. And
you can check out his
website, Ethan weiner.com, check out
shrinks.com/k D for, for his
sort of index to all
of his audio articles. And
he's written a lot of
great stuff, including if you
go to shrinks to.com/katie five,
it's called dispelling audio myths,
dispelling popular audio myths. And
this guy really knows what
he's talking about. And unfortunately
some of his myths include
stuff like, you know, this
product is no good. This
product is, you know, not
necessary. This kind of stuff
is not necessary. And, and
he doesn't get a lot
of mainstream publication that way,
you know, because the sponsors,
the sponsors that in the
advertisers, in those magazines are
the basically he's writing articles
saying, don't buy them. You
don't need them. So, you
know, you can agree or
disagree with him, but he
does have, he does have
a lot of experience to
back up his claim. So
here's one, even though people
cannot hear frequencies above 20
K, it is important that
audio equipment be able to
reproduce higher frequencies to maintain
clarity. That's a myth. So
most people don't hear above
20 K 20 kilohertz, 20
kilohertz. Right? So in the,
he has demonstrations, he has
some really cool demonstrations to
demonstrate this. If I could
say that. So you were
saying that we should or
should not include the sound
above those areas. Well, I
mean, you certainly can, but
it really doesn't. Isn't going
to do a lot for
you Now. I know a
lot of people say that
they don't like to buy
MP3s. They don't like to
buy music like AACS off
of iTunes with lossy compression
because that's what they're buying
broken. Well, that's different compression
schemes do degrade sound. And
if you really want to
talk about digital versus analog,
you gotta talk raw wave.
You know, what happens in
a, in an analog signal
is that this magnetic storage
media stores, the sound waves,
which actually re get reproduced
electronically through the, you know,
analog tape device or, or
records, or, you know, records,
use grooves, et cetera. But
it's the same analog thing
with digital. It all depends
on analog to digital converters
and digital to analog converters
and the analog to digital
converters of the day and
going both ways, you know,
when digital audio first came
out and mass, weren't that
good, the very first CD
players, you know, they cut
corners on the, and you
know, the, the Ady CS
and DACs so that they
could get them out at
a decent price. And so
they really weren't good. So
the first ones to hit
the stores were the ones
that people were viewing. And
there was this, you know,
they don't sound good. Well,
a lot of it was
because they were crappy converters.
The first aid dat, which
is an Elisa's eight track
digital audio recorder that uses
video tapes. It was revolutionary
for studios cause they had
these, they could do away
with their big Studer eight
track machines and just get
this digital tape. But these
aid that's the very first
ones had absolute crap for
audio, digital converters, analog to
digital and digital analog. And
they didn't sound good if
you started mixing a lot
of high frequencies, it had
just turned to mush. It
just go. And so there
began the sentiment out there
that, you know, digital sounds
crappy. And since then the,
the digital to analog and
analog, digital converters, you get
in a soundblaster now that
come actually on a motherboard
are like a hundred times
better than those first ones
that everybody formed their opinions
on. So it's a nonissue,
it's a nonissue. So here's
another one of his myths.
He says, digital audio sounds
worse than analog. And the
lack of digital's fidelity is
revealed as a sterile and
harsh sound that lacks, warmth,
depth, imaging, clarity, and any
number of other vague and
elusive descriptions. The fact he
says is that analog tape
compresses dynamics and adds distortion,
which can be a pleasing
effect for many people, including
me, but for pure faithfulness,
the original sound modern pro
quality digital wins hands down
every time. It is true
that when digital audio is
recorded at too low, a
level, the result can sound
grainy. This distortion is, is
in addition to hiss that
an analog recording also has,
and it is caused by
using an insufficient number of
bits that is recording it
too low. A level on
a 16 bit system is
similar to recording at a
normal level on an eight
bit system. So that's a
lot of information, put it
into concrete things for, for
our listeners in the context
of things like CDs and
things that we understand like
MP3s. Sure. So, so CDs
are not compressed. They're pure
16 bit digital reproductions, the
analog to digital converters that
get used to create those
CDs are pro quality. If
you play those back on
any CD player of the
day, it sounds as good
as good can be. I
mean, it's a, So why
were there a lot of,
I mean, I remember back
in the day when CDs
players came out, you could
buy like a $200 CD
player and then a thousand
dollars CD player. And even
today you can still do
that. Yeah. The thousand dollar
ones basically have, there were
some features called over sampling
that was supposed to, you
know, sort of fill in
the cracks between the bits,
if you will, if you
think of a wave, an
analog sine wave, right. It's
pure it's it's calculus. It's
just smooth. It's there, there
are no steps to it.
But when you digitize, what
you're doing is you're taking
a sample of audio 44
point 1000 times per second,
A snapshot in a moment
in time Shot at a
moment in time, which is
a number it's a number
of amplitude, it's a volume.
And when you look at
that volume in, you start
zooming in on that wave,
you begin to see steps.
And if those steps are
to, you know, what am
I trying to say? I
feel resolution is too low.
The resolution is too low.
Then, you know, you can
almost hear a zipper effect
going from step to step.
Ah, right. But the modern
digital, the analog converters just
don't have this problem. So
a $20, a CD player
from Walmart will do just
fine This day and age.
Absolutely. Anything that you can
possibly pick up and buy.
It's going to be great.
So that's on the playback
side and, but on the
recording side, what are we
recording on right now? Like
what am I looking at
that I'm recording on? Cause
I'm an Oregon here. Yeah.
What we're recording is pure
44.1 mano signals. Now what
we're using is a microphone.
The microphone I'm using is
a audio Technica 40 40.
You can read about that@stringsstir.com
K DB. It's about 300
bucks and it's a condenser
microphone, condenser microphones, large condenser
microphones require power because they're
so delicate in they're so
sensitive. They, they require power
in order to get the
signal amplified enough so that
it becomes microphone level. And
so when that microphone is
introduced through the Phantom power,
then it goes into a
preamp which amplifies it. And
that preempt turns it into
a line level signal. What
is a preamp? I know
that they're always trying to
sell me a preamp when
I go to Magnolia, Hi-Fi
sure what is a preamp
and why would I audio
file one a preamp and
not just a receiver with
all that stuff built in.
There's two different things. We're
talking about. Preamps color, the
sound a preamp gives you
the characteristics of the sound.
It's the first thing in
the signal chain that actually
amplifies and therefore colors the
sound. So it comes out
of equal. It comes into
the microphone and directly into
the preempt. The microphone is
Mike level preamp turns it
into line level. Ah, so,
and when you amplify, you
introduce noise and therefore pre-amps
must be clean. And you
know, some of them have
a nice warming effect. If
you use a tube pre-amp,
you know, preempt with a
tube in it, you get
that nice tube distortion that
John Lennon revolution sound to
the voice. That's a, that
comes up a little natural
distortion. Sounds good. But to
tell you the truth, any
preamp that you can get
on any Mackie mixer these
days is going to be
more than adequate, especially for
just spoken voice for podcasts.
Okay. But even so the
preempt business is a boutique
business and there are companies
out there that sell hand
crafted German, engineered preamps, you
know, for $4,000 for a
single channel. And it's beyond
me. Why, you know, why
you'd need this? I mean,
there granted, I don't go
around listening to them in
a being them. But I
got a feeling that if
you put, you know, even
a decent preamp, like a
PreSonus digit max, which is
what we're using against a,
you know, a $4,001 preamp,
all other things being equal.
I'm not so sure that
your average smoke could tell
the difference. Well, I'm your
average Schmoe and what am
I talking on here? This
is a Behringer microphone. What
kind of microphone is this?
I've got, yeah, You have
a Berenger  okay. That
was about a hundred bucks.
Wasn't it? A hundred bucks.
And the a hundred dollar
version of the 80, 40,
40 is the 80, 2020,
which you can get@ktcshrinksto.com KTC.
Okay. I've got a very
nice looking, a hundred dollar
microphone, big thick cable. It
goes into a Miranda solid
state recorder. Tell me about
this. The Moran solid state
recorder you can find@shrinksor.com slash
K D a and you're
using, this is how we
do the podcast. By the
way, if don't know, Scott
is in Oregon, he's in
Portland and he's talking on
a phone, you have a
headset, Right? I've got a
phone in my left ear
here. And actually another phone
just rang. Yep. I've got
a headset. So you're an
artist actually communicating over the
Right. We're communicating over the
phone, but the phones not
It's being recorded, it's just
there to talk. Right? You're
also talking into a microphone
which is being recorded on
this digital audio recorder. Exactly.
That turns into a wave
file, which then you're going
to send to me via
FTP when we're done and
more on that in a
second, because that brings up
flack. And I'm talking into
a microphone in a sound
booth here, and that microphone
is going into a PreSonus
digit max preamp unit, which
is just a nice preamp
that is going into a
audio interface, which in our
studio here is a Mark
of the unicorn 24 IO,
which you can see at
KDD. We like this because
it has 24 inputs and
24 outputs and a FireWire
cable to your PC and
boom, you've got a little,
A lot of IO. So
I'm one of the inputs
and you're one of the
inputs. Well, not yet. Now
what we do is we
have two of those inputs
going out to two different
phone lines and how we
do that is through a
telephone interface called the telos
one, which you can look
at it, shrinks to.com. Katie
K Telus one is we
actually have a one plus
one, which is two of
these things together. So you
can have two people on
the phone with no crosstalk.
And that's basically what it's
job is to separate the
caller on the other end
of the phone, from whatever
signal you're sending. When you
talk on the phone.net Rocks
does an interview and you're
talking to someone, their phone
channel is coming into that
system and then becomes one
of the channels, Right? And
then we can record it
like a channel and we
don't get any of the
signal that we're sending. Like
my microphone is being sent
down this same phone line,
but it's not coming through
on the track. Okay. That
makes sense. Now we've tried
a lot of other ones,
particularly the JK audio, digital
hybrids, and they just didn't
sound good. You can hear
them in the early days
of.net rocks. You can, every
once in a while, you'll
hear two people talk over
each other and you'll hear
this buzzing Rover drivers sound.
And that's basically because we
couldn't, you know, we had
two people on the same
phone line. We had to
put the schmutz in there.
It's a good way for
a garage podcast or to
record phone conversations. Isn't any
better way than using the
Telus one. And what I
mean by that is there
are other digital hybrids, but
they're going to sound like
ass. What about voiceover IP
solutions? So this is a
good question of voiceover IP,
like Skype, I think is
really good for, you know,
taking the place of telephones.
When you want to call
a mom or you want
to call someone or have
a casual conversation, but if
we're counting on quality and
we're counting on, you know,
nothing, no noises in the
middle of your talking, you
really can't count on it
because you're using the public
internet. And when you're using
the public internet, you know,
somebody starts downloading the Superbowl,
your neighbor or something. You,
you know, you might have
a timeout or something like
that. And it ends up
sounding like this, Right? So
speaking of sound quality, your
sound almost always sounds better
than mine because you're in
a booth, you've got a
better mic, better equipment. I'm
here with this, Mirant's recording
onto a compact flash, but
I'm in a square shaped
room with a, an air
conditioner going That's right. So
you have two things going
bad for you. You're in
a square shaped room with
no sound absorption material, right?
And that means that if
your walls are parallel, the
sound bounces back and forth
until it degrades. And so
you get an echo in
your sound like you're in
your bathroom. Even if you're
in a large room, if
you have parallel walls, you're
going to have that reflection
problem. Okay. That's why when
you go into a stone
church with parallel walls and
you clap, you hear forever
because that stone just reflects,
reflects, reflects, and it just
bounces back and forth. And
that's where reverb comes from
basically. Now, how do you
remove these background sounds that
are going on here as
the people in the next
office, move a chair and,
and the, the, and the
kind of ongoing low hum
of the air conditioning. It's
not, it is, it's very
easy to remove any kind
of low, steady, consistent noise
with noise reduction techniques, which
I'll talk about in a
minute, but what's more difficult.
Is transience anything that's like
somebody says, Whoa, Jorge or
dog bark, or you know,
something that isn't continuous. Okay.
Those things you just have
to pretty much live with.
And that's why we have
booths here because we're in
a noisy city and you
know, cars honk and people
play music and you know,
all sorts of things happen.
So Completing the cycle here,
my, my Berenger microphone goes
through this fancy cable, into
my Moran solid state recorder
at 44.1 kilohertz onto a
flash disc. I put the
flash disc. Well, not so
fast, not so fast. There's
more, yeah. You, when you
plug your microphone in, since
it's a condenser microphone, you
need Phantom power and Phantom
power is a power that's
there when it's required for
microphones and not there when
it's not required. And that's
why it's called Phantom. Now
Why my, my, my Mirant's
drains battery so quickly, Right?
If you didn't need that
48 volts of power, you
were using a dynamic microphone,
like a sure. SM 58
or something like that, then
you wouldn't be taking up
quite so much. Cause I
can drain for double A's
in this thing in and
out. Yep. It sucks power.
So that Phantom power of
boosts the signal for the
microphone at the microphone. And
then it goes into your
pre-amp and you turn up
the volume. Here's something. When
you're setting volume levels, this
is perhaps the most important
thing in the old days
of analog. You wanted to
just set it so that
it goes just a little
bit into the red. You
remember your old tape decks.
When you're recording from an
album, you would set up
against the red. So it
bounces up against the red
will in the digital world.
That's bad. You don't want
to be anywhere near clipping
because analog distortion sounds nice
and warm and fuzzy digital
distortion sounds like. So you
really don't want any. So
as soon as you overdrive,
that's what that's called over.
Yeah. So if you overdrive,
you're done for now. No,
I had done that when
I did some interviews at
tech ed, I went into
a noisy bar that's right.
Brought him back. And you
said, I can't use this
audio because the it's just,
it's just a loud, loud,
Too bad. Yeah. Now the
software that we use, Adobe
audition, which you can see
it shrinks to that calm
KDF. This software has tool
rest, you know, audio restoration
stuff, built into it. And
I'll explain what it does.
One of them is clip
restoration. So if you actually
do spike up above zero
and you clip, you can
tell it to reduce the
Val the volume and restore
the, the wave. And what
it does is it looks
at the curve of you
gotta think of an arc,
right. A parabola. Ah, I
see, I get where you're
going. I know you're going
with this. It goes up,
hits, hits the level and
then flattens out, flattens out,
pulls the whole curve down
and extrapolates it exactly How
many points are up there
and then use Bezier transforms
to, to sort of reconstruct
them. And it is amazing
if you don't have, if
you're clipping, isn't too bad,
it's amazing. In your case,
you over drove the preamp
at the source. So the
preamp is analog right before
it got digitized. It was,
it was hosed. And that's
why we couldn't Restore the
source. That's the source source
was bad. Now it was
just, there was no information
to recover. Yeah. Sometimes we've
been able to do that.
If we in it, there's
a little trick that we
figured out. Jeff and I
figured this out that if
you boost the input above
zero, the clipped input above
zero Sercos way above zero,
and then try to do
clip restoration. The restoration will
actually sometimes figure it out,
but it's not perfect. And
sometimes you'll get a pop
or a big gash of
noise and it's not perfect.
But we have used that
on occasion when the source
audio has been Flipped. So
let's talk, we'll talk about
software in a second, but
I take this wave file
and I flack it. Yeah.
Why is flacking so important
for what we do? I
do. Flack is free lossless
audio codec. And you can
think of it like zip
for wave files. Lossless meaning
it doesn't compress like MP3s
do it, but it does
compress the data. It's just
that when you unflag, it
will decompress it into its
exact replica. So It's, so
it's a much superior way
of zipping up wave files
without losing any of the
actual sound. It's a lossless
wave compression. Yeah. And Microsoft
now has their own lossless
windows, media, audio loss was
Kodak, but what's good. What's
bad about it is that
you only get about 50%
compression just about as much
as you would, if you
took a zip, you know,
and put it in, WinZip
a wave file and put
it in Windsor. So probably
probably more than that, but
Well, if you guys had
120 Meg wave file from
another show and it turned
into 63 megs just about
exactly. Half. Yeah. So what's
good about that is a,
you can then send that
up to, you know, FTP
that somewhere and it takes
half the time as the
wave would take and there's
no degree degradation. Why would
I use this over zip?
If you said that zip
gets you about 50%, as
well as zip code Two
50% for eight bit files
for 16 bit files, it's
much less. I see. So
it's better than zip. Okay.
But, but then you send
it to me and then
I'm recording your phone track
through the telos. And I'm
also recording my microphone track
on the two different tracks.
I take your audio wave
file. And I line that
up to you on the
phone track, just visually. I
mean, I can zoom in
at a sample level and
I can lock it in.
So when I play them
together, I hear one voice.
And then I just mute
out the, ah, mute out
the phone track and do
a little panning. Of course,
you know, what we do
here is we do a
process on our audio files,
which starts with maximizing the
volume. So we do a
hard limit to bring up
the peaks and slam the
peek, slam the big peaks
down a little bit, but
bring it up so that
most of it fits within
the full spectrum. So is
that taking advantage of, is
that making it, so, you
know, I held my mic
this distance away, you held
your mic that distance away.
And we sound like we're
at different volumes. Yes. Normalizing
the volume. Exactly. We're normalizing
the volume and not only
that, but we're making it
so that it's analogous to
saturating the tape. I mean,
we're getting the signal hot,
Trying to get as much
information on that as you
can. Yeah. And getting the
signal hot is important, especially
for the final mix. Cause
a lot of people listen
to these things on iPods
with crappy headphone amplifiers. And
so if you're listening in
a loud environment and you've
got a very soft podcast,
then you're turning, you're cranking
up and hearing more noise
from your, from your iPod
or whatever your stereo system
is With all due respect
to our listeners with crappy
headphones. Yeah. Or if you're
listening at home on a
stereo, you know, and it's
very low, what do you
do? You turn the volume
up on your stereo and
you hear more in the
background. It sounds like, you
know, you know what? Huh.
So what about free software
that Adobe software sounds pretty
expensive? Well, let me get
back to the process here.
The next thing we do
is we do noise reduction,
which is a great, you
can think of it like
a multi band noise gate,
if you know what that
means. Nope. But a with
thousands and thousands of bands,
what is a multi-band noise
gate? Well, I don't want
to go into that, but
basically what it does is
it effectively removes background noise
while maintaining the signal that
isn't noise. So the first
thing you do is you
find the quietest passage you
can, when you only have
the background ambient sound. And
that's why we take, you
know, a second, a few
seconds at the beginning of
the show to take a
noise profile, we were quiet
for five seconds or so
what we do is then
we go back in there,
we select it and we
tell the software, this is
noise. And then, you know,
we've set a few magic
settings, which is the key
to making this stuff work
that we've tweaked over the
years. And we select the
entire file and say, now
remove it. So we'd actually
know that that's a part
of the software. You can
actually say this chunk here
from zero seconds to five
seconds. That was, that was
quiet. That's what we think
is quiet. This is the
background, ambient noise that I
now want you to remove
from the rest of the
file and keep everything else.
And it does it. And
you know, I say tweaking
because if you have too
low a number you're going
to have artifacting. And if
you have artifacting meaning like
bad sounding MP3s, they sound
phased and flanged and all
that kind of thing Artifact
in, in MP3 world is
just like an artifact in
JPEG. It's an undesirable side
effects, exactly Undesirable side effect.
Perfect. So, but if you
have too high, a number,
you won't get enough noise
reduction. So, so it's an
delicate balance thing. We, we
think we have, you know,
the magic numbers that we
come up with to make
it good. And we sometimes
will go through a second
time with a different number,
depending on how noisy the
stuff is. So that's how
we take out your room,
air conditioner and things like
that. Then once we have
those two things done, we,
you know, pan them and
we go through second by
second and listened to it.
And we take out, you
know, while you're listening, you
went or something like that,
we'll go and take that
out. And I hope, I
hope Lawrence is listening to
the show. It doesn't actually
take that out and actually
take out that sniff. So
this is what I call
removing the ums. When people
say, well, where's all the
work. And it's like, well,
it's not only all of
the cleaning of the sound,
but it's also removing a
ridiculous pauses. Thanks. Exactly. Exactly.
So the other, the last
thing I want to end
on here is, is 24
bit recording really better. If
you go to shrinks to.com/
, Ethan Weiner talks about
24 bit versus 16 bit.
This is the sample size,
right? This is the sample,
the size of the sample
that you're pulling out and
saying for every sample I'm
reading, this is how many
bits it's got. Well, I
remember when I switched from
16 bit color on my
monitor to 24 bit and
then to 32 bit, the
it got better. So isn't
more bits, Not necessarily. I
mean, it all depends on,
see, our eyes are more,
are different, have different sensitivity
number-wise than our ears do.
And this is what it's
all about. The bit rate
in colors is how many
colors you can see. And
our eyes are absolutely wicked
sensitive when it comes to
shades of colors. Okay. Hang
on. Sorry. Somebody just like
flush the toilet. So there
was, what do you call,
what do you call that?
An outlier? Yeah. Heavy load
Laurence. Leave that in. So
you can hear what, what
that would sound like if
you didn't remove it. Okay.
So you're saying that our
eyes are much more sensitive,
so it's more important within,
within the, with the air.
Well, and in terms of
number of colors, right. You
know, the, the number of
colors doesn't really, doesn't equate
to number of samples per
second, and you hear, you
know, it's, it's similar in
that they're both resolution, but
the numbers aren't necessarily one-to-one.
So 24 bit systems, basically
Ethan's manifesto is that, you
know, once we perfected the
16 bit digital, the audio
converter and vice versa, the
music industry is pretty much
done because you know, it's
perfect. And now you can
see them inventing things that,
you know, inventing markets for
themselves to sort of carve
out a niche and buy
our stuff because this is
better. Oh, 24. And you've
just brought up a very
profound thing. I mean, we
know technology is getting faster.
Computers are getting faster, monitors
getting bigger, more dots per
inch. You said that you're
saying basically that audio has
pretty much got it. Right.
And that, you know, you
could go in and get
a super audio CD or
DVD audio, but only the
most niche sensitive individuals will
be able to really appreciate
that. Yeah. And he's saying
that nobody can appreciate it,
that it's humanly impossible, unless
you're some kind of freak
of nature that you have,
you know, here's above the
24 bit is the state
of the art in terms
of, you know, resolution in
terms of sample size and
96  is what they're
saying. People should be recording
at now for ultimate. So
it's 96 kilohertz as opposed
to 44.1, right. Instead of
44 point 1000 samples per
second, we want to take
96,000 samples. Anything more would
be superfluous, right? So Ethan
has a bunch of tests
up here. He's got a
first of all, he's got
this myths thing at KT,
five shrinks to that con
Katie five has shrinks to
that con Katie six, he's
sort of a for skeptic
magazine wrote this article called
audio Foolery, which is interesting
as well. And the one
other thing is he's got
it shrinks to that comm
slash Katy seven, a test
where you can actually listen
to the same recording that
has been encoded with different
bit rates to see if
you can tell the difference.
And I'm going to check
this out and that's cool.
So that's the shrinks to
that. Calm Katie seven. Now
here's something about 96 K
Roger Nichols, who was the, who
is steely Dan's engineer. All
right. He's the God of
audio Steely. Dan is the
God of audio. Steely. Dan
is a band. Of course,
that is well known in
all recording as producing pristine,
perfect CDs and records even
before CDs like the album
Asia sounds so good as
the best sounding vinyl I've
had. I have. Okay. And
it's used as reference, you
know, these, these albums are
used as reference albums in
studios everywhere. So Roger Nichols is
no slouch. Okay. Okay. So
he wrote, he has a
blog, which, and he wrote
this post that was going
on 96. K is it
better and strengthened a comm
slash K D eight. And
here's what he says. The
two against nature CD was
mixed 24 bit 44.1 K
to a master link through
Apogee PSX. 100, the PSX
was feeding other units besides
the master link for backup.
We did 90. We did
24 bit 96 K, but
we couldn't hear any difference.
Okay. Scott Hall mastered it from
the 24 bit 4,400 hundred
files in Sonic solutions. Wow.
So, so they did a
simultaneous mix in 96 K
and in 40 41 and
nobody in the studio, not
even Roger Nichols could tell the
difference between the two. Wow.
So it really begs the
question, is this necessary? Or
is this, you know, the,
the audio companies that are
suddenly like, Hey, it fits
perfect. Why, why are we
here? You know? Well, that's
a very good, quick, and
what's, what's next? What's next
a hundred years from now.
Will it be the same?
Right. So I'm not saying,
I believe all this stuff
in terms of Kind of
like a fan boy, you
liked this guy. Yeah. I
mean, I like it when
people come out and make
these kinds of claims. And
when guys like Roger Nichols say
that kind of stuff, because
it just makes you think
about, you know, is monster
cable really necessary, this kind
of stuff. You know, there's
a question if in the
interest of not wasting our
listeners times, which has always
the theme of Hanselman, it's
we always try to give
them at least one bit
of information that they can
use that day, because the
assumption is you're listening to
this while you're driving to
work. And people may say,
wow, this is all very
interesting. I learned about audio
things. I don't know, but
should I really buy a
hundred dollar monster cable? Well,
the answer is, you know,
if there aren't any other
really good quality cables in
the store. Yes. But, but
the fact is, is that
the same quality cable can
be found, you know, at
a radio shack for, you
know, about a, of the
price. So I don't need
24 karat gold coated, super
thick audio cables. No, no.
And that's one of the
myths that Ethan dispels in
his, in his article, it's
even better with optical, right?
One optical cable is no
different than another optical. Absolutely.
It's frigging light. You know,
we move light better. Does
the light move? Yes. Okay.
And digital cables even better
DVI, right? Digital monitor cables,
gold plated. Y you either
get the bit, or you
don't get the bet. Right.
It's tough. People swear by
them though. You never know,
right? Yeah. It looks better.
It looks better. That bit
looks more one than the
other bit better because I
paid more for it. Well,
I think that this has
been very, very interesting. This
is interesting to me because
I don't have to know
this stuff. I know more
now than I did before
we started, but I'm glad
that you're running the sound,
audio quality and not, and
not me on Hansel minutes.
Well, you know, I didn't
want to sound like it's
an ad for pop productions
because you know, we're obviously
trying to convince people that
it's worth it to do
things right. But you know,
it is a lot of
information that anybody who's doing,
any kind of audio can
use. And I hope, I
hope you learned a lot
from it too. I appreciate
it. And I think because
you did most of the
talking on this show, it's
my turn to say that
we thank you for listening
and we'll see you next
week on Hansel minutes.